RFC-017: add section on vote extension upgrade path (#8484)
tendermint/tendermint: docs/rfc/rfc-017-abci++-vote-extension-propag.md

  However we can manually have the node crash and recover as a workaround. This effectively converts
  this case into (h.1).

> ### Upgrade Path

Reviewer: Is this really a subsection of "Pruning the Extended Commit History" ?
I would either move it up inside the "Base Solution" section, or make it a section at the same level as those ones (IOW, I'd add a "#" at the beginning of this line)

Author: It's a subsection of `## Discussion`, using `###` to indicate that it is a subsection of that section.

Reviewer: Man... for some reason I was interpreting the number of "#" the other way around 🤦‍♂️

v0.36 of Tendermint will be the first version to implement the vote extension system.
The v0.36 release aims to be backwards compatible with the previous release, v0.35,
which had no implementation of vote extensions and no mechanisms in place to facilitate
their later addition.

Vote extensions pose an issue for Tendermint upgrades. Chains that upgrade from
v0.35 to v0.36 will attempt to produce the first height running v0.36 without vote
extension data from the previous height. We intend to allow chains to _require_

> vote extensions data. Chains that do so will not make progress without vote

Reviewer: Can you please add a reference to Solution 3, stating something like: the key property of Solution 3 above must be broken in order to upgrade.

Author: Added, please take a look.

extension data and the corresponding application will expect vote extension
data to be present for [PrepareProposal](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/cec0a9798/proto/tendermint/abci/types.proto#L129) call it receives. 

To facilitate the upgrade and provide applications a mechanism to require
vote extensions, we will provide application developers with a [ConsensusParam](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/cec0a9798/proto/tendermint/types/params.proto#L13)
to transition the chain from no history of vote extensions to requiring vote extensions.
This parameter will be an `int64` representing the first height where vote extensions

> will be required for votes to be considered valid. Once the configured height occurs,

Author: > This height is the height where you require vote extensions to be present in order to (have) participate(d) in consensus for that height?

Yes. This is 'during height H, an all nodes are expected to provide vote extensions to have legally participated in consensus'.

> will be required for votes to be considered valid. Once the configured height occurs,

Reviewer: #8453 explains it in a clear way (Section: Effect of the variable on consensus). Consider bringing that section here.

> will be required for votes to be considered valid. Once the configured height occurs,

Author: Added additional description, let me know if this clear.

> the parameter will be disallowed from changing, meaning that vote extensions cannot flip from being

Reviewer 2: How will we enforce this?

Author: We enforce validation of consensus parameters [in ApplyBlock](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/cec0a97987860bd753ae1b2d92963cb96afe6d7c/internal/state/execution.go#L517) at the moment. If validation fails, we fail to apply the block and return to consensus. This is a pretty inelegant mechanism, that may actually be slightly broken, but I was imagining validation would occur for this is in the same way.

required to again being optional. Whatever system is created for transitioning a
chain to requiring vote extensions needs to save the height at which the
parameter changed so that Tendermint can determine whether or not to enforce
vote extension presence on the `PrepareProposal` call. For further clarification
and implementation, see [issue 8453](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/8453)

> 

Reviewer: I would like to have a modified version of:
(a) Solution 3 
(b) the base solution we have implemented

Regarding (b), #8453 explains it very clearly and concisely (consider bringing it here). As for (a), as I stated [here](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/8453#issuecomment-1115823287), I'd be willing to take this on (on a further PR to this RFC).

Author: > I would like to have a modified version of:
(a) Solution 3
(b) the base solution we have implemented
 
Would you mind clarifying what you mean by this? In this document you'd like this written?

Reviewer: If I am not mistaken, the upgrade mechanism will "break" both Solution 3 and the base solution described here and implemented by #8433... as they are today.
So IMO we need to explain how we are going to modify those to make them work.

For (b) I would suggest nothing really involved, apart from bringing the conditions you specified in #8453, a few words on how this will change the solution would do. Probably best to do when you have a clear idea on the code.
A priori, I can think of;
* the condition to switch from blocksync to consensus might have to change
* in blocksync, when we check if a "received block" message is valid, we need to extend the current check (now we could receive no extension in some conditions and the message would still be valid)
* how we verify in blocksync might have to be adapted as well (not sure)
* and I'm probably missing stuff

For (a), I can do it later (when I'm done with the spec cleanup).

What do you think?

v0.36 of Tendermint will be the first version to implement the vote extension system.
The v0.36 release aims to be backwards compatible with the previous release, v0.35,
via a coordinated upgrade. Chains that were previously running v0.35 must be able
to upgrade to v0.36 without creating a new chain. v0.35 had no implementation 
of vote extensions and no mechanisms in place to facilitate their later addition.

Vote extensions pose an issue for Tendermint upgrades. Chains that upgrade from
v0.35 to v0.36 will attempt to produce the first height running v0.36 without vote
extension data from the previous height. We intend to allow chains to _require_
vote extensions data. Chains that require vote extension data will not make progress

> with out. The corresponding application will expect vote extension

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
without it. The corresponding application will expect vote extension
```
